---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Introduction / Chapter 1 / General'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-05-10
CreatedDate: 2024-04-02
description: 'Anti-Dühring'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---

## Intro Material
* Proofed and corrected by Mark Harris 2010.
* Progress Publishers 1947

## Table of Contents
* Preface: London, 1878 - p. 4
* Preface: 1885 - p. 6
* Preface: 1894 - p. 10
* Main Text - p. 10
* Introduction - p.11
    * **Chapter 1: General - p. 11**
    * Chapter 2: What Herr Dühring Promises - p. 17
* Part I: Philosophy - p. 21
* Part II: Political Economy - p. 90
* Part III: Socialism - p. 164
***

### Recorded macros

* "dp = Dühring
* "up = ü
* @g = Used to search for beginning of sentence, create new line, and add a `1.`.
	1. Search for beginning of next sentence with `2)`. 
	1. Enter insert mode. 
	1. Hit <Enter> to create linebreak.
	1. Type to insert this text'1. '
	1. Escape insert mode.
	1. Type `0` to go back to beginning of current line.
	1. Exit
* Note for @g above, if you prefix the overall command with `n`, you can automatically execute that command *n* times. For example, if you type `9@g` from Normal command mode, vim will find the next 9 sentences, line break them, and prepend them with a `1. ` at the beginning of each line. 
	* However, make sure that for the first line, there is at least one space first other wise, the first line will contain *two* sentences.

***

## Introduction / Chapter 1
1. Modern socialism is, in its essence, the direct product of the recognition, on the one hand, of the class antagonisms existing in the society of today between proprietors and non-proprietors, between capitalists and wage-workers; on the other hand, of the anarchy existing in production. 
1. But, in its theoretical form, modern socialism originally appears ostensibly as a more logical extension of the principles laid down by the great French philosophers of the eighteenth century. 
1. Like every new theory, modern socialism had, at first, to connect itself with the intellectual stock- in-trade ready to its hand, however deeply its roots lay in economic facts. 
1. The great men, who in France prepared men’s minds for the coming revolution, were themselves extreme revolutionists. 
1. They recognised no external authority of any kind whatever. 
1. Religion, natural science, society, political institutions--everything was subjected to the most unsparing criticism; everything must justify its existence before the judgment-seat of reason or give up existence. 
1. Reason became the sole measure of everything. 
1. It was the time when, as Hegel says, the world stood upon its head; first in the sense that the human head, and the principles arrived at by its thought, claimed to be the basis of all human action and association; but by and by, also, in the wider sense that the reality which was in contradiction to these principles had, in fact, to be turned upside down. 
1. Every form of society and government then existing, every old traditional notion was flung into the lumber room as irrational; the world had hitherto allowed itself to be led solely by prejudices; everything in the past deserved only pity and contempt. 
1. Now, for the first time, appeared the light of day, henceforth superstition, injustice, privilege, oppression, were to be superseded by eternal truth, eternal Right, equality based on nature and the inalienable rights of man. 
1. We know today that this kingdom of reason was nothing more than the idealised kingdom of the bourgeoisie; that this eternal Right found its realisation in bourgeois justice; that this equality reduced itself to bourgeois equality before the law; that bourgeois property was proclaimed as one of the essential rights of man; and that the government of reason, the Contrat Social of Rousseau, came into being, and only could come into being, as a democratic bourgeois republic. 
1. The great thinkers of the eighteenth century could, no more than their predecessors, go beyond the limits imposed upon them by their epoch.
1. But, side by side with the antagonism of the feudal nobility and the burghers, was the general antagonism of exploiters and exploited, of rich idlers and poor workers. 
1. It was this very circumstance that made it possible for the representatives of the bourgeoisie to put themselves forward as representing not one special class, but the whole of suffering humanity. 
1. Still further. 
1. From its origin the bourgeoisie was saddled with its antithesis: capitalists cannot exist without wage-workers, and, in the same proportion as the mediaeval burgher of the guild developed into the modern bourgeois, the guild journeyman and the day-labourer, outside the guilds, developed into the proletarian. 
1. And although, upon the whole, the bourgeoisie, in their struggle with the nobility, could claim to represent at the same time the interests of the different working classes of that period, yet in every great bourgeois movement there were independent outbursts of that class which was the forerunner, more or less developed, of the modern proletariat. 
1. For example, at the time of the German Reformation and the Peasant War, Thomas Münzer; in the great English Revolution, the Levellers; in the great French Revolution, Babeuf. 
1. There were theoretical enunciations corresponding with these revolutionary uprisings of a class not yet developed; in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries utopian pictures of ideal social conditions; in the eighteenth, actual communistic theories (Morelly and Mably). 
1. The demand for equality was no longer limited to political rights; it was extended also to the social conditions of individuals. 
1. It was not simply class privileges that were to be abolished, but class distinctions themselves. 
1. A communism, ascetic, Spartan, was the first form of the new teaching. 
1. Then came the three great utopians: Saint-Simon, to whom the middle-class movement, side by side with the proletarian, still had a certain significance; Fourier, and Owen, who in the country where capitalist production was most developed, and under the influence of the antagonisms begotten of this, worked out his proposals for the removal of class distinctions systematically and in direct relation to French materialism.

***

1. One thing is common to all three. 
1. Not one of them appears as a representative of the interests of that proletariat which historical development had, in the meantime, produced. 
1. One thing is common to all three. 
1. Not one of them appears as a representative of the interests of that proletariat which historical development had, in the meantime, produced. 
1. Like the French philosophers, they do not claim to emancipate a particular class, but all humanity. 
1. Like them, they wish to bring in the kingdom of reason and eternal justice, but this kingdom, as they see it, is as far as heaven from earth, from that of the French philosophers. 
1. For the bourgeois world, based upon the principles of these philosophers, is quite as irrational and unjust, and, therefore, finds its way to the dust-hole quite as readily as feudalism and all the earlier stages of society. 
1. If pure reason and justice have not, hitherto, ruled the world, this has been the case only because men have not rightly understood them. 
1. What was wanted was the individual man of genius, who has now arisen and who understands the truth. 
1. That he has now arisen, that the truth has now been clearly understood, is not an inevitable event, following of necessity in the chain of historical development, but a mere happy accident. 
1. He might just as well have been born 500 years earlier, and might then have spared humanity 500 years of error, strife, and suffering. 
1. This mode of outlook is essentially that of all English and French and of the first German socialists, including Weitling. 
1. Socialism is the expression of absolute truth, reason and justice and has only to be discovered to conquer all the world by virtue of its own power. 
1. And as absolute truth is independent of time, space, and of the historical development of man, it is a mere accident when and where it is discovered. 
1. With all this, absolute truth, reason, and justice are different with the founder of each different school. 
1. And as each one's special kind of absolute truth, reason, and justice is again conditioned by his subjective understanding, his conditions of existence, the measure of his knowledge and his intellectual training, there is no other ending possible in this conflict of absolute truths than that they shall be mutually exclusive one of the other. 
1. Hence, from this nothing could come but a kind of eclectic, average socialism, which, as a matter of fact, has up to the present time dominated the minds of most of the socialist workers in France and England. 
1. Hence, a mish-mash allowing of the most manifold shades of opinion; a mish-mash of less striking critical statements, economic theories pictures of future society by the founders of different sects, a mish-mash which is the more easily brewed the more the definite sharp edges of the individual constituents are rubbed down in the stream of debate, like rounded pebbles in a brook. 
1. To make a science of socialism, it had first to be placed upon a real basis.

***

1. In the meantime, along with and after the French philosophy of the eighteenth century had arisen the new German philosophy, culminating in Hegel. 
1. Its greatest merit was the taking up again of dialectics as the highest form of reasoning. 
1. The old Greek philosophers were all born natural dialecticians, and Aristotle, the most encyclopaedic intellect of them, had already analysed the most essential forms of dialectic thought. 
1. The newer philosophy on the other hand, although in it also dialectics had brilliant exponents (e.g., Descartes and Spinoza), had, especially through English influence, become more and more rigidly fixed in the so-called metaphysical mode of reasoning, by which also the French of the eighteenth century were almost wholly dominated at all events in their special philosophical work. 
1. Outside philosophy in the restricted sense, the French nevertheless produced masterpieces of dialectic. 
1. We need only call to mind Diderot’s *Le neveu de Rameau* and Rousseau's *Discours sur l'origine et les fondemens de l'inégalité parmi les hommes*. 
1. We give here, in brief, the essential character of these two modes of thought. 
1. We shall have to return to them later in greater detail.  
1. When we consider and reflect upon nature at large or the history of mankind or our own intellectual activity, at first we see the picture of an endless entanglement of relations and reactions in which nothing remains what, where and as it was, but everything moves, changes, comes into being and passes away. 
1. This primitive, naive but intrinsically correct conception of the world is that of ancient Greek philosophy, and was first clearly formulated by Heraclitus: everything is and is not, for everything *is fluid*, is constantly changing, constantly coming into being and passing away.  
1. But this conception, correctly as it expresses the general character of the picture of appearances as a whole, does not suffice to explain the details of which this picture is made up, and so long as we do not understand these, we have not a clear idea of the whole picture. 
1. In order to understand these details we must detach them from their natural or historical connection and examine each one separately, its nature, special causes, effects, etc. 
1. This is, primarily, the task of natural science and historical research: branches of science which the Greeks of classical times on very good grounds, relegated to a subordinate position, because they had first of all to collect the material. 
1. The beginnings of the exact natural sciences were first worked out by the Greeks of the Alexandrian period, 25 and later on, in the Middle Ages, by the Arabs. 
1. Real natural science dates from the second half of the fifteenth century, and thence onward it has advanced with constantly increasing rapidity. 
1. The analysis of nature into its individual parts, the grouping of the different natural processes and objects in definite classes, the study of the internal anatomy of organic bodies in their manifold forms--these were the fundamental conditions of the gigantic strides in our knowledge of nature that have been made during the last four hundred years. 
1. But this method of work has also left us as legacy the habit of observing natural objects and processes in isolation, apart from their connection with the vast whole; of observing them in repose, not in motion; as constants, not as essentially variables, in their death, not in their life. 
1. And when this way of looking at things was transferred by Bacon and Locke from natural science to philosophy, it begot the narrow, metaphysical mode of thought peculiar to the preceding centuries.  
1. To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas, are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart from each other, are objects of investigation fixed, rigid, given once for all. 
1. He thinks in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses. "His communication is 'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil." [Matthew 5:37] 
1. For him a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the same time be itself and something else. 
1. Positive and negative absolutely exclude one another, cause and effect stand in a rigid antithesis one to the other.

***

1. At first sight this mode of thinking seems to us very luminous, because it is that of so-called sound common sense. 
1. Only sound common sense, respectable fellow that he is, in the homely realm of his own four walls, has very wonderful adventures directly he ventures out into the wide world of research. 
1. And the metaphysical mode of thought, justifiable and even necessary as it is in a number of domains whose extent varies according to the nature of the particular object of investigation, sooner or later reaches a limit, beyond which it becomes one-sided, restricted, abstract, lost in insoluble contradictions. 
1. In the contemplation of individual things it forgets the connection between them; in the contemplation of their existence, it forgets the beginning and end of that existence; of their repose, it forgets their motion. 
1. It cannot see the wood for the trees. 
1. For everyday purposes we know and can say, e.g., whether an animal is alive or not. 
1. But, upon closer inquiry, we find that this is, in many cases, a very complex question, as the jurists know very well. 
1. They have cudgelled their brains in vain to discover a rational limit beyond which the killing of the child in its mother's womb is murder. 
1. It is just as impossible to determine absolutely the moment of death, for physiology proves that death is not an instantaneous momentary phenomenon, but a very protracted process. 
1. In like manner, every organic being is every moment the same and not the same, every moment it assimilates matter supplied from without, and gets rid of other matter; every moment some cells of its body die and others build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time the matter of its body is completely renewed, and is replaced by other atoms of matter, so that every organic being is always itself, and yet something other than itself. 
1. Further, we find upon closer investigation that the two poles of an antithesis positive and negative, e.g., are as inseparable as they are opposed and that despite all their opposition, they mutually interpenetrate. 
1. And we find, in like manner, that cause and effect are conceptions which only hold good in their application to individual cases; but as soon as we consider the individual cases in their general connection with the universe as a whole, they run into each other, and they become confounded when we contemplate that universal action and reaction in which causes and effects are eternally changing places, so that what is effect here and now will be cause there and then, and vice versa.

***

None of these processes and modes of thought enters into the framework of metaphysical reasoning. Dialectics, on the other hand, 

