---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Part II / Chapter 10 / From Kritische Geschichte'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-03-10
CreatedDate: 2024-03-01
description: 'Anti-Dühring'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---

## Intro Material
* Proofed and corrected by Mark Harris 2010.
* Progress Publishers 1947

## Table of Contents
* Preface: London, 1878 - p. 4
* Preface: 1885 - p. 6
* Preface: 1894 - p. 10
* Main Text - p. 10
* Part I: Philosophy - p. 21
* Part II: Political Economy - p. 90
	* Chapter 1: Subject Matter and Method - p. 90
	* Chapter 2: Theory of Force, pt 1 - p. 97
	* Chapter 3: Theory of Force, pt 2 - p. 102
	* Chapter 4: Theory of Force, pt 3 - p. 107
	* Chapter 5: Theory of Value - p. 113
	* Chapter 6: Simple and Compound Labour - p. 120
	* Chapter 7: Capital and Surplus Value, pt 1 - p. 124
	* Chapter 8: Capital and Surplus Value, pt 2 - p. 130
	* Chapter 9: Natural Laws of the Economy; Rent of the Land - p. 142
	* **Chapter 10: From *Kritische Geschichte* - p. 147**
* Part III: Socialism - p. 164
***

### Recorded macros

* "dp = Dühring
* "up = ü
* @g = Used to search for beginning of sentence, create new line, and add a `1.`.
	1. Search for beginning of next sentence with `2)`. 
	1. Enter insert mode. 
	1. Hit <Enter> to create linebreak.
	1. Type to insert this text'1. '
	1. Escape insert mode.
	1. Type `0` to go back to beginning of current line.
	1. Exit
* Note for @g above, if you prefix the overall command with `n`, you can automatically execute that command *n* times. For example, if you type `9@g` from Normal command mode, vim will find the next 9 sentences, line break them, and prepend them with a `1. ` at the beginning of each line. 
	* However, make sure that for the first line, there is at least one space first other wise, the first line will contain *two* sentences.

***

## Part II / Chapter 10 / From *Kritische Geschichte*

1. Finally, let us take a glance at the *Kritische Geschichte der Nationalökonomie*, at 'that enterprise' of Herr Dühring's which, as he says, 'is absolutely without precedent'. 
1. It may be that here at last we shall find the definitive and most strictly scientific treatment which he has so often promised us.
1. Herr Dühring makes a great deal of noise over his discovery that '*economic science* is an enormously modern phenomenon.'
1. In fact, Marx says in Capital: 'Political economy...as an independent science, first sprang into being during the period of manufacture'; 
	* and in *Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie*, page 29, that 'classical political economy...dates from William Petty in England and Boisguillebert in France, 
	* and closes with Ricardo in the former country and Sismondi in the latter'. 
1. Herr Dühring follows the path thus laid down for him, except that in his view *higher* economics begins only with the wretched abortions brought into existence by bourgeois science after the close of its classical period. 

***

1. On the other hand, he is fully justified in triumphantly proclaiming at the end of his introduction: 'But if this enterprise, in its externally appreciable peculiarities and in the more novel portion of its content, is absolutely without precedent, in its inner critical approaches and its general standpoint, it is even more peculiarly mine'. 
1. It is a fact that, on the basis of both its external and its internal features, he might very well have announced his 'enterprise' (the industrial term is not badly chosen) as: *The Ego and His Own* [an oblique reference to Stirner’s book]. 
1. Since political economy, as it made its appearance in history, is in fact nothing but the scientific insight into the economy in the period of capitalist production, principles and theorems relating to it, for example, in the writers of ancient Greek society, can only be found in so far as certain phenomena--commodity production, trade, money, interest-bearing capital, etc.--are common to both societies. 
1. In so far as the Greeks make occasional excursions into this sphere, they show the same genius and originality as in all other spheres. 
1. Because of this, their views form, historically, the theoretical starting-points of the modern science. 
1. Let us now listen to what the world-historic Herr Dühring has to say. 
	* 'We have, strictly speaking, really [!] absolutely nothing positive to report of antiquity concerning scientific economic theory, and the completely unscientific Middle Ages give still less occasion for this...*[ for this--reporting* nothing! *]*...
	* ...As however the fashion of vaingloriously displaying a semblance of erudition...has defaced the true character of modern science, notice must be taken of at least a few examples.' 
1. And Herr Dühring then produces examples of a criticism which is in truth free from even the 'semblance of erudition'.









***
Aristotle's thesis, that
