---
layout: ../../layouts/MdPostDescLayout.astro
title: 'Introduction'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-01-10
CreatedDate: 2023-12-25
description: 'Matteo Pasquinelli'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---
## AI as Division of Labour
### Quotes
1. Karl Marx *Capital* (1867): "The special skill of each individual machine-operator, who has now been deprived of all significance, vanishes as an infinitesimal quantity in the face of the science, the gigantic natural forces, and the mass of the social labour embodied in the system of machinery, which, together with these three forces, constitutes the power of the 'master'."

1. Gramsci (1932): "All human beings are intellectuals ... although one can speak of intellectuals, one cannot speak of non-intellectuals, because non-intellectuals do not exist ... There is no human activity from which every form of intellectual participation can be excluded: *Homo faber* cannot be separated from *homo sapiens*."


### 10 JH Break
1. In the twentieth century, few would have ever defined a truck driver as a 'cognitive worker', an intellectual. 
1. In the early twenty-first, however, the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in self-driving vehicles, among other artefacts, has changed the perception of manual skills such as driving, revealing how the most valuable component of work in general has never been just manual, but has always been cognitive and cooperative as well. 
1. Thanks to AI research -- we must acknowledge it -- truck drivers have reached the pantheon of intelligentsia. 
1. It is a paradox -- a bitter political revelation -- that the most zealous development of automation has shown how much 'intelligence' is expressed by activities and jobs that are usually deemed manual and unskilled, an aspect that has often been neglected by labour organisation as much as critical theory. 
1. In fact, in the current digital age, only a few sociologists, such as Richard Sennett, have taken the trouble to emphasise that 'making is thinking', a dimension that the historians of science such as Lissa Roberts and Simon Schaffer have captured in the elegant image of the 'mindful hand' -- a hand that, in the workshop of the Renaissance as much as in those of the industrial age, has not only expressed muscular strength but also inspired design, inventions, and scientific breakthroughs. If there is a denial of the intelligence of manual labour and social activities today, that seems to be a symptom also of the overgrowth of the digital sphere and the dematerialisation of human activities, which have contributed to the aura of mystery that has been eventually constructed around AI.  
1. What is AI? A dominant view describes it as the quest 'to solve intelligence' -- a solution supposedly to be found in the secret logic of the mind or in the deep physiology of the brain, such as in its complex neural networks. 
1. In this book I argue, to the contrary, that the inner code of AI is constituted not by the imitation of biological intelligence but by the *intelligence of labour and social relations*. 
1. Today, it should be evident that AI is a project to capture the knowledge expressed through individual and collective behaviours and encode it into algorithmic models to automate the most diverse tasks: from image recognition and object manipulation to language translation and decision-making. 
1. As in a typical effect of ideology, the 'solution' to the enigma of AI is in front of our eyes, but nobody can see it -- nor does anybody want to.
1. Let us return to the contested project of the self-driving car. What kind of work does a driver perform? 
1. And to what extent can AI automate such an activity? 
1. With a considerable degree of approximation and hazard, a self- driving vehicle is designed to imitate all the micro-decisions that a driver makes on a busy road. 
1. Its artificial neural networks 'learn' the correlations between the visual perception of the environment and the mechanical control of the vehicle (steering, accelerating, braking) together with ethical decisions to be taken in a few milliseconds in case of danger. 
1. Driving requires high cognitive skills that cannot be left to improvisation, but also rapid problem-solving that is possible only thanks to habit and training that are not completely conscious. 
1. Driving remains essentially a social and cooperative activity, which follows both codified rules (with legal constraints) and spontaneous ones, including a tacit cultural code which is different in each locality. 
1. It is deemed difficult to encode such a complex activity, and even the entrepreneur Elon Musk has admitted, after not a few fatal accidents of Tesla cars, that 'generalized self-driving is a hard problem'. 
1. In all its problematic aspects, however, the industrial project of self-driving vehicles has made clear that the task of driving is not merely 'mechanical'. 
1. If the skill of driving can be translated into an algorithmic model to begin with, it is because driving is a logical activity -- because, ultimately, *all labour is logic*.  
1. What, then, is the relationship between labour, rules, and automation, i.e., the invention of new technologies? 
1. This entanglement is the core problem of AI which this book seeks to explore. 
1. But this is not a completely new perspective for framing AI. 
1. The historian of science Lorraine Daston, for example, has already illustrated this problem in the great calculation projects of the Enlightenment that preceded automatic computation. 
1. In the late eighteenth century, in order to produce the lengthy logarithmic tables necessary for the modernisation of revolutionary France, the mathematician Gaspard de Prony had the idea to apply the industrial method of the division of labour (canonised by Adam Smith in *The Wealth of Nations*) to hand calculation. 
1. For this purpose, de Prony arranged a *social algorithm* -- a hierarchical organisation of three groups of clerks which divided the toil and each performed one part of the long calculation, eventually composing the final results. 
1. A few years later, in industrial England, Charles Babbage adopted the intuition of the division of labour as the internal principle of the Difference Engine, designing in this way the first prototype of the modern computer. 
1. Babbage, importantly, understood that the division of labour was not only a principle to design machines but also to compute the costs of production (what has been known since then as the 'Babbage principle').  
1. In the industrial age, the supervision of the division of labour used to be the task of the factory's master. 
1. The eye of the master, in workshops and also in camps and plantations, had long supervised and disciplined workers, drawing the plans of assembly lines as well as the shifts of forced labour. 
1. Before industrial machines were invented, urban sweatshops and colonial estates were already 'mechanical' in their regime of body discipline and visuality. 
1. As the philosopher Michel Foucault illustrated, the imposition of such disciplinary techniques -- based on the segmentation of time, space, and relations -- prepared the terrain for the capitalist regime of labour exploitation. 
1. In parallel, the rationalist view of the world helped to further describe the movement of the human body in detail and draft its mechanisation. 
1. Historian Sigfried Giedion detailed this process in his famous volume *Mechanisation Takes Command*. According to Giedion, mechanisation begins 'with the concept of Movement', then it replaces handicraft, and, finally, its full development is 'the assembly line, wherein the entire factory is consolidated into a synchronous organism'.
1. This mechanical mentality culminated in Taylorism -- a system of 'scientific management' that sought to economize workers' movements down to the finest detail. 
1. Indeed, as the political economist Harry Braverman once noted, 'Taylor understood the Babbage principle better than anyone of his time, and it was always uppermost in his calculations.' 
1. In order to surveil the worker's smallest gesture, the Taylorist system even acquired cinematographic eyes: the factory's master became a sort of movie director who filmed workers in order to measure and optimize their productivity, somehow realising what media scholar Jon Beller has termed the 'cinematic mode of production'. 
1. Taylorism prompted the discipline of 'time and motion study' which was pursued, in the same years, by both the Soviet revolutionary Aleksei Gastev and the US engineers Frank and Lillian Gilbreth, who introduced similar photographic techniques such as, respectively, the *cyclogram*, and *chronocyclegraph*. 
1. This book follows these analytical studies of the labour process through the industrial age up to the rise of AI, aiming to show how the 'intelligence' of technological innovation has often originated from the imitation of these abstract diagrams of human praxis and collective behaviours.  
1. When industrial machines such as looms and lathes were invented, in fact, it was not thanks to the solitary genius of an engineer but through the imitation of the collective diagram of labour: by capturing the patterns of hand movements and tools, the subdued creativity of workers' know-how, and turning them into mechanical artefacts. 
1. Following this theory of invention, which was already shared by Smith, Babbage, and Marx in the nineteenth century, this book argues that the most sophisticated 'intelligent' machines have also emerged by imitating the outline of the collective division of labour. 
1. In the course of this book, this theory of technological development is renamed the *labour theory of automation*, or *labour theory of the machine*, which I then extend to the study of contemporary AI and generalise into a *labour theory of machine intelligence*. 
1. Already for Marx, the master was no longer an individual but, as mentioned in the opening quote to this introduction, an integrated power made up of 'the science, the gigantic natural forces, and the mass of the social labour embodied in the system of machinery'. 
1. After the expansion of 'the division of labour in society', as Émile Durkheim recorded at the end of the nineteenth century, the eye of the master evolved as well into new technologies of control such as statistics and the global 'operations of capital' (to use Sandro Mezzadra and Brett Neilson's apt phrase). 
1. Since the end of the twentieth century, then, the management of labour has turned all of society into a 'digital factory' and has taken the form of the software of search engines, online maps, messaging apps, social networks, gig- economy platforms, mobility services, and ultimately AI algorithms, which have been increasingly used to automate all the abovementioned services. 
1. It is not difficult to see AI nowadays as a further centralisation of digital society and the orchestration of the division of labour throughout society.  
1. The thesis that the design of computation and 'intelligent machines' follow the schema of the division of labour is not heretical but receives confirmation from the founding theories of computer science, which have inherited a subtext of colonial fantasy and class division from the industrial age. 
1. The celebrated genius of automated computation Alan Turing, for instance, himself reiterated a hierarchical and authoritarian mode of thinking. In a 1947 lecture, Turing envisioned the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE), one of the first digital computers, as a centralised apparatus that orchestrated its operations as a hierarchy of master and servant roles:
	* *Roughly speaking those who work in connection with the ACE will be divided into its masters and its servants.* 
	* *Its masters will plan out instruction tables for it, thinking up deeper and deeper ways of using it.* 
	* *Its servants will feed it with cards as it calls for them. They will put right any parts that go wrong.* 
	* *They will assemble data that it requires. In fact the servants will take the place of limbs.* 
	* *As time goes on the calculator itself will take over the functions both of masters and of servants. The servants will be replaced by mechanical and electrical limbs and sense organs.*
	* *One might for instance provide curve followers to enable data to be taken direct from curves instead of having girls read off values and punch them on cards. The masters are liable to get replaced because as soon as any technique becomes at all stereotyped it becomes possible to devise a system of instruction tables which will enable the electronic computer to do it for itself.*
	* *It may happen however that the masters will refuse to do this. They may be unwilling to let their jobs be stolen from them in this way.* 
	* *In that case they would surround the whole of their work with mystery and make excuses, couched in well chosen gibberish, whenever any dangerous suggestions were made. I think that a reaction of this kind is a very real danger.*
1. The prose of the young Turing, in dividing computing tasks between 'masters', 'servants', and 'girls' is fierce. 
1. It is reminiscent of Andrew Ure's gothic depictions of the industrial factory in the Victorian age as 'a vast automaton, composed of various mechanical and intellectual organs, acting in uninterrupted concern for the production of a common object, all of them being subordinated to a self-regulated moving force'. 
1. Similarly, Turing imagined an intelligent automaton that in the future would be able to reprogram itself and replace both masters and servants. 
1. Turing's vision is contradicted today by the army of 'ghost workers' from the Global South, who, as Mary Gray and Siddharth Suri have documented, are removed from sight to let the show of machine autonomy go on. 
1. Paradoxically for Turing, AI came to replace mostly masters, that is managers, rather than servants -- workers are needed (and always will be) to produce data and value for the voracious pipelines of AI and its global monopolies, and, on the other hand, to provide the maintenance of such a mega-machine under the form of content filtering, security checks, evaluation and non-stop optimisation. 
1. As gender studies scholars Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi Vora have pointed out, the dreams of full automation and AI such as Turing's are not neutral but are historically grounded on the 'surrogate humanity' of enslaved servants, proletarians, and women that have made possible, through their invisible labour, the universalistic ideal of the free and autonomous (white) subject.

### The many histories of AI

1. Writing a history of AI in the current predicament means reckoning with a vast ideological construct: among the ranks of Silicon Valley companies and also hi-tech universities, propaganda about the almighty power of AI is the norm and sometimes even repeats the folklore of machines achieving 'superhuman intelligence' and 'self-awareness'. 
1. This folklore is well exemplified by apocalyptic *Terminator* narratives, in which AI systems would achieve technological singularity and pose an 'existential risk' to the survival of the human species on this planet, as the futurologist Nick Bostrom, among others, professes. 
1. Mythologies of technological autonomy and machine intelligence are nothing new: since the industrial age, they have existed to mystify the role of workers and subaltern classes. 
1. As Schaffer has remarked, while describing the cult of automata in Babbage's age, 'To make machines look intelligent it was necessary that the sources of their power, the labour force which surrounded and ran them, be rendered invisible.' 
1. Speculative narratives aside, which never go into sufficient technical detail to clarify which kind of algorithms would actually execute 'superintelligence', one also finds today numerous *technical histories* of AI that, on the other hand, promise to explain its complex algorithms. 
1. These technical overviews often voice corporate expectations for a 'master algorithm' that would solve all tasks of perception and cognition at a prodigious rate of information compression (because this is the very unromantic metrics by which 'intelligent' systems are ultimately assessed). 
1. Once again, these readings rarely consider the historical contexts and social implications of automation, and draw a linear history of mathematical achievements which reinforces technological determinism. 
1. Within these technical histories of AI, one should also include cognitive science, as a considerable part of this field actually developed under the influence of computer science. 
1. Margaret Boden's monumental two-volume *Mind as Machine* (2006) remains probably one of the most detailed histories of AI as cognitive science, showing the complexity of this genealogy, however, without ideological fervour.
1. Resisting such narrow technical perspectives, a growing number of authors have started addressing the social implications of AI from the standpoint of workers, communities, minorities, and society as a whole. 
1. These authors question the virtuosity of algorithms that claim to be 'intelligent' while in fact amplifying inequalities, perpetuating gender and racial biases, and consolidating new form of knowledge extractivism. 
1. Thanks to books such as Cathy O'Neil's *Weapons of Math Destruction* (2016), Safiya Noble's *Algorithms of Oppression* (2018), Ruha Benjamin's *Race after Technology* (2019), and Wendy Chun's *Discriminating Data* (2021), among many others, the new field of critical AI studies is growing. This novel scholarship builds upon older investigations of AI, cybernetics, and Cold War rationality from previous decades, among which should be included Alison Adam's *Artificial Knowing* (1998), Philip Agre's *Computation and Human Experience* (1997), Paul Edwards's *The Closed World* (1996), Joseph Weizenbaum's *Computer Power and Human Reason* (1976), and Hubert Dreyfus's paper for the Rand Corporation 'Alchemy and Artificial Intelligence' (1965), which is usually considered the first philosophical critique of AI.
Within the expanding landscape of critical works, this book's concern is to illuminate the social genealogy of AI and, importantly, the standpoint -- the social classes -- from which AI has been pursued as a vision of the world and epistemology. 
1. Different social groups and configurations of power have shaped information technologies and AI in the past century. 
1. Rather than on the 'shoulders of giants', as the saying goes, it could be said that the early paradigms of mechanical thinking and late machine intelligence have been developed, in different times and ways, 'on the shoulders' of merchants, soldiers, commanders, bureaucrats, spies, industrialists, managers, and workers. In all these genealogies, the automation of labour has been the key factor, but this aspect is often neglected by a historiography of technology that privileges science's point of view 'from above'.
1. A common approach, for instance, links quite deterministically the rise of cybernetics, digital computation, and AI to abundant funding from the US military during World War II and in the Cold War period. 
1. Yet recent studies have clarified that the archipelago of such 'war rationality' was quite unstable and cultivated paradigms such as game theory and linear programming that were also key in modelling the arms race and military logistics. 
1. The influence of state apparatuses on information technologies, anyhow, started well before the military acceleration of World War II: the automation of information retrieval and statistical analysis dates back to the need to mechanise public bureaucracy and government work, at least since the 1890 United States census that introduced the Hollerith machine to process punched cards. 
1. The 'government machine' (as Jon Agar has called it) anticipated the rise of the large data centres of the digital age, which have been, as is notorious, not just the business of internet companies but also of intelligence agencies, as the mathematician Chris Wiggins and historian Matthew L. Jones have detailed. In short, for more than a hundred years, it has always been the accumulation of 'big data' about society and its behaviours that prompted the development of information technologies, from Hollerith's tabulator to machine learning itself.
1. In summary, AI represents the continuation of data analytics techniques first supported by state bureaus, secretly cultivated by intelligence agencies, and ultimately consolidated by internet companies into a planetary business of surveillance and forecasting. 
1. This reading, however, is once again a history 'from above' that focuses on only the techniques of control and rarely the subjects on whom this control is exercised. 
1. The targets of this power (or 'surveillance capitalism' in Shoshana Zuboff's definition) are usually described not as actors possessing autonomy and 'intelligence' on their own but as passive subjects of measurement and control. 
1. This is a problem of critical theory in general and critical AI studies in particular: although these studies are concerned about the impact of AI on society, they often overlook the role of collective knowledge and labour as the primary source of the very 'intelligence' that AI comes to extract, encode, and commodify. 
1. Moreover, these studies often fail to see the contribution of social forms and forces to the key stages of technological invention and development. 
1. A true critical intervention should challenge this hegemonic position of AI as the unique 'master' of collective intelligence. 
1. The Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci once argued against the hierarchies of education that 'all human beings are intellectuals': in a similar way, this book aims at rediscovering the centrality of the social intelligence that informs and empowers AI. 
1. It also contends -- in a more radical thesis -- that such social intelligence shapes the very design of AI algorithms from within.  
1. This book is intended as an incursion into both the technical and social histories of AI, integrating these approaches into a sociotechnical history that may identify also the economic and political factors that influenced its inner logic. 
1. Rather than siding with a conventional social constructivism and going beyond the pioneering insights of social informatics, it tries to extend to the field of AI the method of historical epistemology -- one propagated in the history of science, in a different way, by Boris Hessen, Henryk Grossmann, Georges Canguilhem, and Gaston Bachelard, and more recently by the work of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science in Berlin, among other initiatives. 
1. Where social constructivism generically emphasises the influence of external factors on science and technology, historical epistemology is concerned with the dialectical unfolding of social praxis, instruments of labour, and scientific abstractions within a global economic dynamics. 
1. This book attempts to study AI and algorithmic thinking in a similar way that historical and political epistemology has studied, in the modern age, the rise of mechanical thinking and scientific abstractions in relation to socio-economic developments. 
1. In this respect, over the past decades, a political epistemology of science and technology has also been strongly pursued by feminist theorists such as Hilary Rose, Sandra Harding, Evelyn Fox Keller, and Silvia Federici, among others. 
1. These authors have convincingly explained the rise of modern rationality and mechanical thinking (to which AI also belongs) in relation to the transformation of women's body, and the collective body in general, into a productive and docile machine. 
1. In the traditions of political epistemology, we should also consider the labour process analysis that was initiated by Braverman's Labor and Monopoly Capital (1974) and the workers' inquiries of Italian operaismo, which Romano Alquati, for instance, conducted at the Olivetti computer factory in Ivrea as early as 1960. 
1. Braverman and Alquati pioneered influential works that first showed how Babbage's automated computation projects in the nineteenth century as much as cybernetics in the twentieth were inherently related to the sphere of labour and its organisation.  
1. The automation of cognition as pattern recognition The translation of a labour process into a logical procedure and subsequently into a technical artefact is rarely straightforward and flawless; it often displays instead a spurious and experimental character. 
1. In this sense, the title The Eye of the Master contains not only a political but also a technical analogy. 
1. It signals, somewhat ironically, the ambivalence of the current paradigm of AI -- deep learning -- which emerged not from theories of cognition, as some may believe, but from contested experiments to automate the labour of perception, or pattern recognition. 
1. Deep learning has evolved from the extension of 1950s techniques of visual pattern recognition to non-visual data, which now include text, audio, video, and behavioural data of the most diverse origins. 
1. The rise of deep learning dates to 2012, when the convolutional neural network AlexNet won the ImageNet computer vision competition. 
1. Since then, the term 'AI' has come to define by convention the paradigm of artificial neural networks which, in the 1950s, it must be noted, was actually its rival (an example of the controversies that characterise the 'rationality' of AI). 
1. Stuart and Hubert Dreyfus illuminated this schism in their 1988 essay 'Making a Mind versus Modeling the Brain', in which they outlined the two lineages of AI -- symbolic and connectionist -- that, based on different logical postulates, have also followed different destinies. 
1. Symbolic AI is the lineage that is associated with the 1956 Dartmouth workshop for which John McCarthy coined the questionable term 'artificial intelligence'. 
1. Its key applications have been the Logic Theorist and General Problem Solver -- and the array of expert systems and inference engines in general -- which were proven trivial and prone to combinatorial explosion. 
1. Connectionism, on the other hand, is the lineage of artificial neural networks pioneered by Frank Rosenblatt's invention of the 'perceptron' in 1957, which unfolded into convolutional neural networks in the late 1980s and, eventually, launched the deep learning architecture that has prevailed since the 2010s.
1. The two lineages pursue different kinds of logic and epistemology. 
1. The former professes that intelligence is a representation of the world (knowing- that) which can be formalised into propositions and, therefore, mechanised following deductive logic. 
1. The latter, in contrast, argues that intelligence is experience of the world (knowing-how) which can be implemented into approximate models constructed according to inductive logic. 
1. Pace corporate propaganda and computationalist philosophies of the mind, neither of these two paradigms has managed to fully imitate human intelligence. 
1. Machine learning and deep artificial neural networks, however, due to their resolution in rendering multidimensional data, have proven quite successful in techniques of pattern recognition and, therefore, in the automation of numerous tasks. 
1. Against a tradition which repeats the overly celebrated saga of the Dartmouth workshop, this book highlights the origins of artificial neural networks, connectionism, and machine learning as a more compelling history of AI about which, especially regarding Rosenblatt's work, critical and exhaustive literature is still missing.

### Structure of the book
