---
layout: ../../layouts/MdPostDescLayout.astro
title: 'Chapter 2'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-01-10
CreatedDate: 2023-12-25
description: 'Matteo Pasquinelli'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---
## Babbage and the Mechanisation of Mental Labour
### Quotes
1. Charles Babbage (1832): 'We must remember that another and a higher science, itself still more boundless, is also advancing with a giant's stride ... It is the science of calculation -- which becomes continually more necessary at each step of our progress, and which must ultimately govern the whole of the applications of science to the arts of life.'

### Computation as division of labour

1. In early nineteenth-century England, 'computer' was not the name of a machine but of a human -- namely an office clerk, often a woman, who had to make tedious calculations by hand for the government, the Astronomical Society, or the Navy. 
1. At times 'computers' were also working from home, receiving stacks of numbers to calculate and sending back results by mail: this was literally the first historical occurrence of a computing network that took the form of domestic labour and probably involved further family members. 
1. With the aim of streamlining this time-consuming and error- prone process, the polymath Charles Babbage had the idea of replacing the repetitive work of many 'computers' with an automated machine powered by steam. 
1. Henry Colebrooke, presenting Babbage with a gold medal at the Astronomical Society of London in 1823 for the invention of the Difference Engine, declared: 
	* *In other cases, mechanical devices have substituted machines for simpler tools or for bodily labour...*
	* *But the invention to which I am adverting...substitutes mechanical performance for an intellectual process...*
	* *Mr. Babbage's invention puts an engine in place of the [human] computer.*
1. Babbage's Difference Engine, celebrated as the precursor of modern computers, was born out of a business ambition -- to automate the calculations of logarithms and sell error-free logarithmic tables, which were crucial in astronomy and for maintaining British hegemony in maritime trade. Among other instigators, it was the problem of the longitudinal calculus in open sea that gave a special impetus to mechanised computation. Small mechanical calculators already existed, but they were not automated and solved only the basic mathematical operations. Babbage had the idea of connecting a complex logarithmic calculator to the continuous motion provided by steam engines, so as not to have just a calculating device, but a calculating engine that could establish the business of calculation at an industrial scale -- with the fantasies of unbounded performance and unfettered economic growth that the novel word 'engine' carried at the time. The idea of the automatic computer, in the contemporary sense, emerged out of the project to mechanise the mental labour of clerks rather than the old alchemic dream of building thinking automata -- although the latter narrative would often be used, in the nineteenth century as much as in the century of corporate AI, to masquerade the former business. Precisely what kind of 'intellectual process', or mental labour, was Babbage aiming to mechanise? If we are to understand the limitations and potentialities of computation, this is a key clarification, without which even the definition of AI itself can only amplify misunderstandings. The first kind of mental labour to be mechanised was hand calculation -- a specific skill that persisted until the model of the Turing machine, which was envisioned itself in the form of a human typist (a 'computer') reading and writing figures on a tape, as in a telegraph station. As chapter 9 will show by following a different genealogy of computation and AI, this was not to be the case with artificial neural networks for pattern recognition, which aimed to automate not hand calculation but the labour of perception and supervision.  Babbage's Difference Engine was a peculiar artefact. It was not a computer in the contemporary sense, because it did not distinguish software from hardware, instruction from information (fig 2.1). As it was at the same time both hardware and software, the Difference Engine appears aesthetically intriguing to contemporary eyes: its brass gears and rotating cylinders physically embodied a single algorithm, French mathematician Gaspard de Prony's 'method of differences', which was used to abbreviate the calculation of square numbers and logarithms. The Difference Engine was also not a computer in the contemporary sense, because it was not a programmable device: the title of an industrial machine featuring an independent input for information belongs to the more modest Jacquard loom. The Difference Engine prototype was never finalised, while the Jacquard loom was produced in thousands of exemplars and became a driver of the industrial age. The Jacquard loom set a standard for information storage -- the punched card -- which IBM would maintain with little to no variation until the twentieth century. Moreover, the first 'digital picture' -- that is, an image described by a numerical file -- happened to be another textile artefact: an 1839 portrait of Jacquard himself that was woven using 24,000 of these punched cards. Babbage kept a copy of Jacquard's portrait in his studio and adopted the punched card as an input format for another unrealised prototype -- the Analytical Engine -- whose design, unlike its precursor, theoretically separated information from instruction and could evaluate different types of equation.
