---
layout: ../../layouts/MdPostDescLayout.astro
title: 'Chapter 7'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-01-10
CreatedDate: 2023-12-25
description: 'Matteo Pasquinelli'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---
## The Automation of Pattern Recognition
### Quotations
* Warren McCulloch (1948): 'As the industrial revolution concludes in bigger and better bombs, an intellectual revolution opens with bigger and better robots.'
* John von Neumann (1948): 'A new, essentially logical, theory is called for in order to understand high-complication automata and, in particular, the central nervous system. It may be, however, that in this process logic will have to undergo a pseudomorphosis to neurology to a much greater extent than the reverse.'

### The controversy about Gestalt perception
1.  At the core of the intuition that paved the way for artificial neural networks lies an enduring controversy: whether or not human perception is an act of cognition that can be analytically represented and therefore mechanised. 
1. The confrontation about this issue flared up in the 1940s during the Macy conferences between the cyberneticians (who argued that the perceptual field as a whole can be computed by machines, such as simple electric relays) and the Gestalt school (who maintained that a machine would never be able to emulate the complex synthetic faculty of the human mind). 
1. It constituted a new chapter in the ongoing Gestalt controversy from Europe; yet this time, exiled from Nazi Germany to the United States, its protagonists included mathematicians and engineers in addition to the previous cast of philosophers, psychologists, and neurologists. 
1. It was in the aftermath of this debate, in fact, that the expression 'Gestalt perception' gradually morphed, in military reports and academic publications, into the more familiar 'pattern recognition' and gave momentum to the experiments with artificial neural networks.  
1. Cyberneticians such as Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts proposed a dramatic simplification of the act of perception, at which any art historian would baulk. 
1. However, their research provoked a breakthrough in the 'automation of perception' that would unfold, half a century later, in the well-known exploits of deep learning. 
1. Before cyberneticians reduced the faculty of perception to a simple binary act of classification (whether or not an image belongs to a given class), Gestalt scholars such as Max Wertheimer, Kurt Koffka, and Wolfgang Köhler had advanced a more complex theory of perception. 
1. Gestalt theory famously referred to the fact that one perceives the whole before its parts -- a melody, for instance, remains discernible even when it is played in a different scale and with different sounds. 
1. It pointed to diverse phenomena of image closure, such as the subconscious perception of a configuration in its totality in spite of limited information about its elements (e.g., the perception of a triangle in the abstract relation of three separated elements). 
1. Eventually, it was formalised in the principles of *Prägnanz* (proximity, similarity, continuity, connectedness, etc.) and encapsulated in the famous motto 'The whole is other than the sum of its parts'.
1. **Textbooks on machine learning repeat the standard account that McCulloch and Pitts's invention of artificial neural networks was inspired by the neurophysiology of the brain, while overlooking the broader intellectual context that includes their confrontation with the Gestalt school.**
1. Though artificial neural networks may be regarded as a brilliant solution to a challenge of automation, it was the Gestalt school that established the perception of a visual form as a key issue to address. 
1. The specific problem that Gestalt theory urged cyberneticians to resolve through a computational architecture was the recognition of a pattern, such as an image. 
1. Is the recognition of an image equivalent to logical reasoning? McCulloch and Pitts thought so, therefore arguing that any visual pattern (even a complex, fuzzy, and incomplete one) can be fully defined by computing the relation of its elements within the visual field. 
1. In their view, the recognition (or classification) of a pattern could be resolved by an algorithm to compute a large input into a simple binary output (0 or 1), representing in this way a simple binary question: 'Does the image belong to a given class or not?'
1. After short skirmishes during the Macy conferences, the Gestalt controversy convened at a dedicated event: the Hixon symposium on 'Cerebral Mechanisms and Behavior', which took place at the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, in 1948, and was attended by McCulloch, von Neumann, and Köhler, as well as famed psychologists Heinrich Klüver and Karl Lashley, among others. 
1. The Hixon symposium was a watershed event in the history of computation: even John McCarthy admitted that his felicitous term 'artificial intelligence', which was coined for the Dartmouth conference in 1956, had been inspired by his attendance at this earlier symposium as a graduate student in mathematics.
1. At the time, neither of the opposing factions won the controversy. 
1. As physicist and science historian Steve Heims noted, 'In a sense, both were romantics, Köhler in his holism and McCulloch in his mechanism.'9 As a matter of fact, it was von Neumann who proposed a synthesis of Gestalt theories and computational logic that eventually progressed the field and inspired Rosenblatt's neural network perceptron, which implemented statistical calculus in place of McCulloch and Pitts's rigid logic. 
1. **This chapter aims to re-examine the influence of Gestalt theory upon the history of AI, and to highlight, in particular, the transformation of artificial neural networks from mediums of logical reasoning into instruments for pattern recognition.**
1. The Gestalt controversy and the Hixon symposium are proposed, then, as an alternative history of AI that does not relitigate the (failed) enterprise of symbolic AI and its ambitions to mechanise deductive logic, but shifts the focus to the lineage of connectionism and the automation of inductive logic.
1. The Gestalt controversy is a cognitive fossil of unresolved problems that is today buried at the core of deep learning, and its study can help us to understand the logical form and limits that twenty-first-century AI has inherited. 
1. The Gestalt controversy also points to an optical unconscious still operative in contemporary machine learning, as the technique of pattern recognition has been extended from visual to nonvisual information datasets over the past few decades. 
1. In a peculiar twist of fate, it is the mechanisation of perception as pattern recognition that has come to be traded as the mechanisation of cognition, or artificial intelligence. 
1. Nevertheless, despite its origins in the automation of vision, the use of anthropomorphic metaphors of perception to describe the operations of artificial neural networks, as well as today's deep learning, is misleading. 
1. As is often repeated, machine vision 'sees' nothing: what an algorithm 'sees' -- that is, calculates -- are topological relations among numerical values of a two- dimensional matrix. 
1. Ultimately, the breakthrough brought about by artificial neural networks was not so much biomorphic as, in this case, *topological*. In other words, it was not so much about imitating the structure of neural networks in the eye's retina as, essentially, about developing techniques of self-organising information to read the visual matrix.

### The invention of artificial neural networks
1. As outlined in the previous chapter, the invention of artificial neural networks was canonised in a milestone paper by McCulloch and Pitts: 'A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity' (1943). 
1. This was followed by another key text that was a direct response to the Gestalt controversy: 'How We Know Universals' (1947).11 While the former introduced the idea of a network of artificial neurons to automate logical reasoning, the latter advanced its application to 'the perception of auditory and visual forms'.
1. The passage from the former to the latter marks a logical breakaway. 
1. Whereas the 1943 paper proposed neural networks as *deductive machines* for propositional calculus, the 1947 paper pointed towards *inductive machines* for automating pattern recognition. 
1. It is worth bearing in mind that McCulloch and Pitts's 1943 paper did not mention computers, because they were not then an established technology.
1. In order to put the history of AI in perspective, it is important at this point to clarify the difference between deductive and inductive logic. 
1. Since Leibniz's idea of a *calculus ratiocinator*, the modern project of pursuing machine intelligence has been founded on the postulate that human logic can be expressed by propositional logic ('if x, then y is true/false'), which is equivalent to Boolean logic (AND, OR, and NOT operators). 
1. A proposition expressed according to this formal logic can be easily encoded into a mechanism made of rotating gears, electric relays, or electronic gates, such as valves or transistors. 
1. On a closer look, this type of logic is pursuing a linear form of rationality that replicates the linearity of written language and symbol manipulation according to the rules of deductive inference -- an approach well exemplified by the Turing machine and the way it executes instructions from a one-dimensional tape. 
1. Symbolic AI, expert systems, and inference engines are all examples of this tendency of deductive machines that continued until the 1980s. On the other hand, artificial neural networks -- along with all machine learning algorithms -- are examples of inductive machines. 
1. Whereas deductive logic is the application of a rule, reasoning from the general to the particular, inductive logic involves reasoning from the particular to the general, thereby forming rules of classification. 
1. The canonical example is the movement from the discovery that 'each human being dies' to the definition of the rule that 'all human beings are mortal'. This opposition between deductive and inductive logic is key to understanding not only the Gestalt controversy but also the rise of machine learning.
1. According to Heims's account, in preparation for the highly anticipated visit of the Gestalt scholar Köhler to the Macy conferences in New York, Klüver issued a challenge to the gathered scientists: to formulate a theory on 'how an automaton could perceive Gestalten'. 
1. Klüver's challenge was taken up by McCulloch and Pitts, who, with the financial support of the Macy and Rockefeller foundations, were seeking to move beyond their 1943 proof that a finite network of simplified modelneurons could compute anything that can be unambiguously stated in words. 
1. Their aim, this time, was to develop neural mechanisms for specific brain functions such as perception, ideally with enough precision to be tested experimentally.
1. As a result of the discussion, in 1947, McCulloch and Pitts published their paper 'How We Know Universals: The Perception of Auditory and Visual Forms'. 
1. Compared to the previous one from 1943, here the concern is not the computation of propositions according to a linear logic but, rather, the recognition of a pattern in a bidimensional matrix. 
1. McCulloch and Pitts conceived a 'device' by which 'numerous nets, embodied in special nervous structures, serve to classify information according to useful common characters'. 
1. What would this 'device' look like? Given the technical development of the late 1940s, it had to be made, for instance, of photoreceptors that could turn a visual input into a digital image -- that is, a grid of pixels measured by numerical values. 
1. Without going into detail about colour, presumably such a grid would have to have been encoded in binary digits: value 1 for black pixels, value 0 for white pixels. McCulloch and Pitts's device for pattern recognition was a computing network that would resolve a grid of binary numbers into the binary output 1 (true) if a pattern was recognised or 0 (false) if a pattern was not recognised.
1. In mathematical terms, a device for pattern recognition is an algorithm that computes the same output for any input that a human classifies as belonging to the same type of patterns. 
1. With their mathematical device, McCulloch and Pitts wanted to challenge the Gestalt school's belief in the uniqueness of human cognition and demonstrate that perception can be described algorithmically and automated. 
1. Their original exposition of an artificial neural network for pattern recognition reads:
	* Numerous nets, embodied in special nervous structures, serve to classify information according to useful common characters. 
	* In vision they detect the equivalence of apparitions related by similarity and congruence, like those of a single physical thing seen from various places. In audition, they recognize timbre and chord, regardless of pitch. 
	* The equivalent apparitions in all cases share a common figure and define a group of transformations that take the equivalents into one another but preserve the figure invariant. So, for example, the group of translations removes a square appearing at one place to other places; but the figure of a square it leaves invariant. 
	* These figures are the geometric objects of Cartan and Weyl, the Gestalten of Wertheimer and Köhler. We seek general methods for designing nervous nets which recognize figures in such a way as to produce the same output for every input belonging to the figure.
1. According to McCulloch and Pitts, it would be possible to compute the principles of Gestalt recognition even when they seem to involve a profound power of abstraction, as in the phenomenon of closure (when, for example, to use again the above-cited example, a triangle is recognised from incomplete lines and non-connected points). 
1. Although it may appear reductionist, McCulloch and Pitts in fact proposed a complex dimorphism of dimension between perception and cognition. 
1. Gestalt theorists maintained that perception and cognition exist along a continuous isomorphism: the spatial relations of an object are isomorphic with its percept, and thus with its mental image. 
1. In contrast, McCulloch and Pitts suggested the possibility of transforming the twodimensional relations of an image into a one-dimensional representation -- basically a code, or logical proposition -- without undermining the content or quality of information.
1. This is a crucial passage in the history of connectionism and AI: McCulloch and Pitts argued that the isomorphism between an image and its logical representation is not necessary. 
1. The form of a triangle, for instance, does not need to be memorised as an isomorphic triangle in some parts of the brain but can be distributed across different dimensions (a topological transformation also termed 'internal representation' in deep learning). 
1. The two scientists advanced this hypothesis against the Gestalt school to argue that a visual manifold can be computed by a linear information machine such as that of Turing:
	* This point is especially to be taken against the Gestalt psychologists, who will not conceive a figure being known save by depicting it topographically on neuronal mosaics, and against the neurologists of the school of Hughlings Jackson, who must have it fed to some specialized neuron whose business is, say, the reading of squares. 
	* That language in which information is communicated to the homunculus who sits always beyond any incomplete analysis of sensory mechanisms and before any analysis of motor ones neither needs to be nor is apt to be built on the plan of those languages men use toward one another.
1. McCulloch and Pitts's paradigm of perception and cognition was as much as atomistic as multidimensional: it was based on the idea that in order to 'perceive' and 'understand', a biological or artificial neural network can dismember a manifold of two dimensions and project it onto a different configuration of dimensions than the original ones. 
1. In a visionary way, they challenged the famous dictum by Gestalt theory: 'The whole is other than the sum of its parts.' They sought to replace Gestalt theory's holistic complexity with another kind of multidimensionality which was purely mathematical.

### What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain

1. At the Hixon symposium, Köhler was the lone delegate representing the Gestalt school. 
1. He participated not to defend a mystic power of the mind but to present physical measurements of brain activity during visual perception, precisely 'records of electric currents which have been taken from the heads of human subjects under conditions of pattern vision'.20 Köhler's study demonstrated that Gestalt theorists were not opposed to the quest for neural correlates of perception; they simply pursued a traditional method of scientific testing rather than the thinking by analogy of cyberneticians. 
1. As Heims has also noted:
	* Gestalt psychologists did not capitulate to mysticism, political reaction and vitalism, all of which were connected with the hunger for wholeness. 
	* They insisted on empirical studies of phenomena and sought fundamental laws describing structural characteristics of experience, even as they supported the popular opposition to atomistic and mechanistic analyses of the world.
1. Specifically, Köhler relied on the model of force fields, which was derived from physics and inspired, among others, by his close friend Max Planck, to explain the phenomenon of visual perception happening between eye and brain.
1. At the Hixon symposium, the *physical hypothesis* of force fields underlying Gestalt perception clashed with the *computational analogy* of brains as finite-state automata. 
1. Köhler attacked McCulloch's reductionist approach to the brain, arguing that nerve impulses, when seen and measured by a histologist or neurophysiologist, do not look like logical propositions but simply like ... impulses! 
1. Against cybernetics' view of the brain as 'machine arrangements', Köhler proposed the theory of force fields to explain a structural continuity of form (isomorphism) between the stimulus of perception, its neural correlates, and the higher faculties of cognition (such as the faculty of insight):
	* Continuity is a structural trait of the visual field. It is also a structural fact that in this field circumscribed particular percepts are segregated as patches, figures and things. In both characteristics, we have found, the macroscopic aspect of cortical processes resembles visual experience. To this extent, therefore, vision and its cortical correlate are isomorphic.
1. In contrast with the gung-ho enthusiasm of cyberneticians for neural correlates resembling logical operators, Köhler was cautious about his own findings. 
1. Moreover, contrary to what the term may suggest, Gestalt 'isomorphism' was not a monotonic notion but one that included principles of plasticity such as self-organisation and selfrepair in the broader sense. 
1. The Gestalt school considered the idea of the mind as a finite-state automaton unfit for describing these higher capacities of the mind for synthesis and abstraction through self-organisation.  
1. On the other side of the camp, the most vocal and virulent antiGestaltist was Norbert Wiener, who called holism a 'pseudo-scientific bogy'. Accordingly, Wiener argued that 'if a phenomena can only be grasped as a whole and is completely unresponsive to analysis, there is no suitable material for any scientific description of it; for the whole is never at our disposal'. 
1. Wiener shared McCulloch and Pitts's computational view of the mind ideologically, with no hesitation:
	* It is a noteworthy fact that the human mind and animal nervous systems, which are known to be capable of the work of a computation system, contain elements which are ideally suited to act as relays. These elements are the so-called neurons or nerve cells.
1. The idea of artificial neurons and the project of automating Gestalt perception had already been discussed when, in 1948, Wiener published *Cybernetics*, which provided the first summa of digital computation and information theories. 
1. In 1951, a few years after the Hixon symposium, Köhler wrote a harsh review of Wiener's book and its chapter about 'Gestalt and Universals', in which he argued that while it is true that machines are better than humans at calculation, such calculation does not constitute thinking or, indeed, capacity of insight (*Einsicht*) into a problem:
	* In the relation of human beings to the computing machines, thinking in the proper sense of the term appears to remain the task of the former. 
	* Excellent engineers and mathematicians build into such instrument mechanically forced ways of operation which may serve as factually reliable substitutes for certain quantitative activities of the human mind such as addition and multiplication. 
	* It is not astonishing that, so far as speed is concerned, the substituted operations of the machines are far superior to anything that human brains can achieve. At the same time, these operations appear to be generically different from those of a human being who is occupied with a mathematical problem ... The machines do not know, because among their functions there is none that can be compared with insight into the meaning of a problem.
1. In the mid-1950s, neurophysiologist Jerome Lettvin and biologist Humberto Maturana invited McCulloch and Pitts to contribute to their studies on the neurons of the frog's eye. 
1. Their conclusion would be published in 1959 in the famous paper 'What the Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain', which for many represents the final nail in the coffin of the Gestalt controversy. 
1. Their research moved from the simple observation that the optical nerve of higher animals is composed of fewer fibres than the retina. 
1. This suggests that the stimulus must undergo compression before it reaches the brain. 
1. The question that arises is what exactly happens to the stimulus between the retina, the optical nerve, and the visual cortex? The scientists took the frog as their model organism. They measured the stimuli in the optical nerve using an electrode, while presenting high-contrast shapes to the animal's eye. 
1. In this way, they recorded four types of neural behaviours, or 'operations': '1) sustained contrast detection; 2) net convexity detection; 3) moving edge detection; 4) net dimming detection'. 
1. By way of illustration, let us consider the second operation -- net convexity detection -- which is perhaps the most intuitive to understand: it is about the perception of a small object roaming across the visual field, like a flying insect, which is crucial for food retrieval and the survival of the frog. As such, it was colloquially called the 'bug detector'.
1. Against the Gestalt theory's primacy of brain functions, the authors argued that the eye already performs basic tasks of cognition, such as pattern recognition, and sends signals to the brain that are already wellformed concepts and not just percepts. 
1. They contended that the eye is already employing the language of 'complex abstractions' rather than being simply a medium of sensations. 
1. They concluded that 'the eye speaks to the brain in a language already highly organized and interpreted, instead of transmitting some more or less accurate copy of the distribution of light on the receptors'. 
1. What the eye sends to the brain would not be of a form analogous to the percept (which would maintain Gestalt proportions) but rather a semantic proposition -- a piece of information interpreting the pattern present in the percept. 
1. The collective article also integrated findings from McCulloch and Pitts's 1947 paper, including the observation that an image can be logically defined and 'perceived' by the calculation of the relations between its elements according to a spatial logic.
	* By transforming the image from a space of simple discrete points to a congruent space where each equivalent point is described by the intersection of particular qualities in its neighborhood, we can then give the image in terms of distributions of combinations of those qualities. In short, every point is seen in definite contexts. The character of these contexts, genetically built in, is the physiological synthetic a priori.
1. The biomorphism of the early artificial neural networks (in this case, the imitation of biological neural networks) must eventually be questioned. 
1. The human organ that McCulloch and Pitts most often investigated and envisioned as a network of logical operators was not the brain but the eye; and, of the eye, their artificial neural networks implicitly inherited a specific hierarchy of behaviour. 
1. In McCulloch and Pitts's 1947 essay, the cooperation among the nodes of the artificial neural network was supposed to resolve the combinatorial geometry of the field of vision, not the propositional logic of a syllogism, as in their 1943 publication. 
1. In the Gestalt controversy, then, one does not find a model of cognition to be mechanised but rather several models of perception, since the elements of the perceptual field, rather than mental states, were represented in computational terms. 
1. The development of artificial neural networks continued by mostly studying the neurons of the eye rather than the brain: from Lettvin's frogs to David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel's cats (which inspired convolutional neural networks such as AlexNet), the history of connectionist AI is indebted to experiments on animals and their organs of vision.
1. From a mathematical point of view, the Gestalt controversy was, on one hand, about the transformation of an image into a logical construct and, on the other, about the fact that a logical construct of human reasoning may share the probabilistic features of image perception.35 Reading between the lines, the Gestalt controversy was already pointing towards a logical form that would only emerge properly in twenty-firstcentury machine learning: the idea of a spatial and statistical dimension of information beyond the linear modality of the Turing machine. 
1. Logic gates and perceptual fields -- the basic concepts of cybernetics and the Gestalt school respectively -- were two polarised ideals that the evolution of AI eventually overcame and synthesised into more and more abstract constructs: today the inner logic of machine learning is described, for instance, through entities such as multidimensional vectors, latent spaces, and statistical distributions. 
1. The visual matrix (and, with it, the picture plane of modern iconology) has since then evolved into these advanced logical forms, into vast ramifications of statistical inference yet to be fully understood.

### The language of the brain is not the language of mathematics




