---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Part 2: Dialectics'
LastUpdatedDate: 2024-02-10
CreatedDate: 2023-08-30
description: 'S: U and S'
author: 'Jeff'
tags: []


---

# Intro Material
* 2020 Reprint of 1975 Edition by Foreign Languages Press.
* Socialism: Utopian + Scientific

## Table of Contents
* Forward to the French Edition - p. 1
* Preface to the First German Edition - p. 5
* Preface to the Fourth German Edition - p. 9
* Introduction to the English Edition - p. 11
* Main Text - p. 37
* Part 1 - p. 39
* Part 2 - p. 55
* Part 3 - p. 65
***

### Recorded macros

* @g = Used to search for beginning of sentence, create new line, and add a `1.`.
	1. Search for beginning of next sentence with `2)`. 
	1. Enter insert mode. 
	1. Hit <Enter> to create linebreak.
	1. Type to insert this text'1. '
	1. Escape insert mode.
	1. Type `0` to go back to beginning of current line.
	1. Exit
* Note for @g above, if you prefix the overall command with `n`, you can automatically execute that command *n* times. For example, if you type `9@g` from Normal command mode, vim will find the next 9 sentences, line break them, and prepend them with a `1. ` at the beginning of each line. 
	* However, make sure that for the first line, there is at least one space first other wise, the first line will contain *two* sentences.

***

1. In the meantime, the new German philosophy, terminating in Hegel, had arisen along with and after the French philosophy of the eighteenth century. 
1. Its greatest merit was its resumption of dialectics as the highest form of thinking. 
1. The old Greek philosophers were all born dialecticians, and Aristotle, the most encyclopaedic intellect among them, had already investigated the most essential forms of dialectical thought. 
1. On the other hand, although the newer philosophy, too, included brilliant exponents of dialectics (e.g., Descartes and Spinoza), it had become—especially under English influence—increasingly stuck in the so-called metaphysical mode of reasoning, by which the French of the eighteenth century were also almost wholly dominated, at all events in their special philosophical works. 
1. Outside philosophy in the narrow sense, the French nevertheless produced masterpieces of dialectic; we need only call to mind Diderot’s *Rameau’s Nephew* and Rousseau’s *Discourse on the Origin of Inequality Among Men*.  
1. We give here, in brief, the essential character of these two modes of thought.  
1. When we reflect on nature or the history of mankind or our own intellectual activity, at first we see the picture of an endless maze of connections and interactions, in which nothing remains what, where and as it was, but everything moves, changes, comes into being and passes away. 
1. At first, therefore, we see the picture as a whole, with its individual parts still more or less kept in the background; we observe the movements, transitions, connections, rather than the things that move, change and are connected. 
1. This primitive, naïve but intrinsically correct conception of the world is that of ancient Greek philosophy, and was first clearly formulated by Heraclitus: everything is and also is not, for everything is in flux, is constantly changing, constantly coming into being and passing away.  
1. But this conception, correctly as it expresses the general character of the picture of phenomena as a whole, does not suffice to explain the details of which this picture is made up, and so long as we do not know these, we are not clear about the whole picture. 
1. In order to understand these details we must detach them from their natural or historical connection and examine each one separately according to its nature, special causes and effects, etc. 
1. This is primarily the task of natural science and historical research, branches of science which for the Greeks of classical times occupied only a subordinate position on very good grounds, because they had first of all to piece together the materials for these sciences to work upon. 
1. Only after a certain amount of natural and historical material has been collected can critical analysis, comparison, and arrangement in classes, orders, and species be undertaken.  
1. The beginnings of the exact natural sciences were, therefore, worked out first by the Greeks of the Alexandrian period, and later on, in the Middle Ages, further developed by the Arabs. 
1. Genuine natural science dates from the second half of the fifteenth century, and from then on it has advanced with ever increasing rapidity. 
1. The analysis of nature into its individual parts, the division of the different natural processes and objects into definite classes, the study of the internal anatomy of organic bodies in their manifold forms—these were the fundamental conditions for the gigantic strides in our knowledge of nature that have been made during the last four hundred years. 
1. But this has bequeathed us the habit of observing natural objects and processes in isolation, detached from the general context; of observing them not in their motion, but in their state of rest; not as essentially variable elements, but as constant ones; not in their life, but in their death. 
1. And when this way of looking at things was transferred by Bacon and Locke from natural science to philosophy, it begot the narrow, metaphysical mode of thought peculiar to the last centuries.  
1. To the metaphysician, things and their mental images, ideas, are isolated, to be considered one after the other and apart from each other, fixed, rigid objects of investigation given once for all. 
1. He thinks in absolutely unmediated antitheses. 
1. “His communication is ‘yea, yea; nay, nay’; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.” For him a thing either exists or does not exist; a thing cannot at the same time be itself and something else. 
1. Positive and negative absolutely exclude one another; cause and effect stand in a rigid antithesis one to the other.  
1. At first sight this way of thinking seems to us most plausible because it is that of so-called sound common sense. 
1. Yet sound common sense, respectable fellow that he is in the homely realm of his own four walls, has very wonderful adventures directly he ventures out into the wide world of research. 
1. The metaphysical mode of thought, justifiable and even necessary as it is in a number of domains whose extent varies according to the nature of the object, invariably bumps into a limit sooner or later, beyond which it becomes one sided, restricted, abstract, lost in insoluble contradictions, because in the presence of individual things it forgets their connections; because in the presence of their existence it forgets their coming into being and passing away; because in their state of rest it forgets their motion. 
1. It cannot see the wood for the trees. 
1. For everyday purposes we know and can definitely say, e.g., whether an animal is alive or not. 
1. But, upon closer inquiry, we find that this is sometimes a very complex question, as the jurists very well know.  
1. They have cudgelled their brains in vain to discover a rational limit beyond which the killing of the child in its mother’s womb is murder. 
1. It is just as impossible to determine the moment of death, for physiology proves that death is not a sudden instantaneous phenomenon, but a very protracted process.  
1. In like manner, every organic being is every moment the same and not the same; every moment it assimilates matter supplied from without and gets rid of other matter; every moment some cells of its body die and others build themselves anew; in a longer or shorter time the matter of its body is completely renewed and is replaced by other molecules of matter, so that every organic being is always itself, and yet something other than itself.  
1. Further, we find upon closer investigation that the two poles of an antithesis, like positive and negative, are as inseparable as they are opposed, and that despite all their opposition, they interpenetrate. 
1. In like manner, we find that cause and effect are conceptions which only hold good in their application to the individual case as such; but as soon as we consider the individual case in its general connection with the universe as a whole, they merge, they dissolve in the concept of universal action and reaction in which causes and effects are constantly changing places, so that what is effect here and now will be cause there and then, and vice versa.  
1. None of these processes and modes of thought fit into the frame of metaphysical thinking. 
1. But for dialectics, which grasps things and their conceptual images essentially in their interconnection, in their concatenation, their motion, their coming into and passing out of exis- tence, such processes as those mentioned above are so many corrobora- tions of its own procedure.  
1. Nature is the test of dialectics, and it must be said for modern science that it has furnished this test with very rich and daily increasing materials, and thus has shown that in the last resort nature works dia- lectically and not metaphysically; that she does not move in an eternally uniform and perpetually recurring circle, but goes through a genuine historical evolution. 
1. In this connection Darwin must be named before all others. 
1. He dealt the metaphysical conception of nature the heaviest blow by his proof that the organic world of today—plants, animals, and consequently man too—is the product of a process of evolution going on through millions of years. 
1. But since the natural scientists who have learned to think dialectically are still few and far between, this conflict of the results of discovery with traditional modes of thinking explains the endless confusion now reigning in theoretical natural science, the despair of teachers as well as students, of authors and readers alike.  
1. An exact representation of the universe, of its evolution and of that of mankind, and of the reflection of this evolution in the minds of men can therefore only be obtained by the method of dialectics with its constant regard to the general actions and reactions of becoming and ceasing to be, of progressive or retrogressive changes. 
1. And it is in this spirit that modern German philosophy immediately set to work. 
1. Kant began his career by resolving the stable solar system of Newton and its eternal duration, after the famous initial impulse had once been given, into a historical process, the formation of the sun and all the planets out of a rotating nebulous mass. 
1. From this he already drew the conclusion that, given this origin of the solar system, its future death followed of necessity. 
1. Half a century later his theory was established mathematically by Laplace, and after another half century the spectroscope confirmed the existence in cosmic space of such incandescent masses of gas in various stages of condensation.  
1. This new German philosophy terminated in the Hegelian system.  
1. In this system—and this is its great merit—the whole world, natural, historical, intellectual, is for the first time represented as a process, i.e., as in constant motion, change, transformation, development; and the attempt was made to show internal interconnections in this motion and development. 
1. From this point of view the history of mankind no longer appeared as a wild whirl of senseless deeds of violence, all equally condemnable at the judgment-seat of mature philosophic reason and best forgotten as quickly as possible, but as the process of evolution of humanity itself. 
1. It was now the task of the intellect to follow the gradual march of this process through all its devious ways, and to trace out the inner logic running through all its apparently contingent phenomena.  
1. That the Hegelian system did not solve the problem it posed itself is immaterial here. 
1. Its epoch-making merit was that it posed the problem. 
1. This problem is indeed one that no single individual will ever be able to solve. 
1. Although Hegel was—with Saint-Simon—the most encyclopaedic mind of his time, he was restricted, first, by the neces- sarily limited extent of his own knowledge and, second, by the limited extent and depth of the knowledge and conceptions of his epoch. 
1. To these limits a third must be added. 
1. Hegel was an idealist. 
1. To him the thoughts within his brain were not the more or less abstract images of actual things and processes, but on the contrary, things and their development were only the realized images of the *Idea*, existing somehow from eternity before the world existed. 
1. Consequently everything was stood on its head and the actual interconnection of things in the world was completely reversed. 
1. Although Hegel had grasped some individual interconnections correctly and with genius, yet for the reasons just given there is much that in point of detail necessarily turned out botched, artificial, laboured, in a word, upside down. 
1. The Hegelian system as such was a colossal miscarriage—but it was also the last of its kind. 
1. In fact, it was suffering from an internal and incurable contradiction. 
1. On the one hand, its essential postulate was the conception that human history is a process of development, which, by its very nature, cannot find its intellectual final term in the discovery of any so-called absolute truth. 
1. But on the other hand, it laid claim to being the very essence of precisely this absolute truth. 
1. A system of natural and historical knowledge which is all-embracing and final for all time is in contradiction with the fundamental laws of dialectical thinking; which by no means excludes, but on the contrary includes, the idea that systematic knowledge of the entire external world can make giant strides from generation to generation.  
1. The recognition of the complete inversion of previous German idealism necessarily led to materialism, but, it must be noted, not to the purely metaphysical, exclusively mechanical materialism of the eigh- teenth century. 
1. In contrast to the naïvely revolutionary, flat rejection of all previous history, modern materialism sees history as the process of development of humanity and its own task as the discovery of the laws of motion of this process. 
1. The conception was prevalent among the French of the eighteenth century and later in Hegel that nature was a whole, moving in narrow circles and for ever remaining immutable, with eternal celestial bodies, as in Newton’s teaching, and with unal- terable species of organic beings, as in Linnaeus’ teaching. 
1. In opposition to this conception, modern materialism embraces the more recent advances of natural science, according to which nature too has its history in time, the celestial bodies, like the organic species with which they became peopled under favourable conditions, coming into being and passing away, and the recurrent cycles, insofar as they are at all admissible, assuming infinitely vaster dimensions. 
1. In both cases modern materialism is essentially dialectical and no longer needs any philosophy standing above the other sciences. 
1. As soon as each separate science is required to clarify its position in the great totality of things and of our knowledge of things, a special science dealing with this totality is super- fluous. 
1. All that remains in an independent state from all earlier philosophy is the science of thought and its laws—formal logic and dialectics.  
1. Everything else merges into the positive science of nature and history.  
1. But whilst the revolution in the conception of nature could only be made to the extent that research furnished the corresponding positive materials, certain historical events had already asserted themselves much earlier which led to a decisive change in the conception of history.  
1. In 1831, the first working-class rising took place in Lyons; between 1838 and 1842, the first national working-class movement, that of the English Chartists, reached its height. 
1. The class struggle between pro- letariat and bourgeoisie came to the front in the history of the most advanced countries in Europe in proportion to the development, on the one hand, of modern industry, and on the other, of the recently acquired political supremacy of the bourgeoisie. 
1. Facts more and more strenuously gave the lie to the teachings of bourgeois economics on the identity of the interests of capital and labour, on the general harmony and general prosperity flowing from free competition. 
1. None of these things could be ignored any longer, any more than the French and English socialism, which was their theoretical, though extremely imperfect, expression. 
1. But the old idealist conception of history, which was not yet dislodged, knew nothing of class struggles based on material interests, indeed knew nothing at all of material interests; production and all economic relations appeared in it only as incidental, subordinate elements in the “history of civilization”.  
1. The new facts made imperative a new examination of all past history. 
1. Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception of its primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these social classes warring with each other are always the products of the relations of production and exchange—in a word, of the economic relations of their epoch; that therefore the economic structure of society always forms the real basis, from which, in the last analysis, the whole superstructure of legal and political institutions as well as of the religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical period is to be explained. 
1. Hegel had freed the conception of history from metaphysics—he had made it dia- lectical; but his conception of history was essentially idealistic. 
1. But now idealism was driven from its last refuge, the conception of history; now a materialistic treatment of history was advanced, and the way found to explain man’s consciousness by his being, instead of, as heretofore, his being by his consciousness.  
1. Henceforward socialism no longer appeared as an accidental discovery by this or that intellect of genius, but as the necessary outcome of the struggle between two classes produced by history—the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
1. Its task was no longer to manufacture as perfect a system of society as possible, but to examine the historico-economic process from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity sprung and to discover in the economic situation thus created the means of ending the conflict. 
1. But the earlier socialism was just as incompatible with this materialist conception of history as the French materialists’ conception of nature was with dialectics and modern natural science.  
1. The earlier socialism certainly criticized the existing capitalist mode of production and its consequences. 
1. But it could not explain this mode of production, and, therefore, could not get the mastery of it. 
1. It could only simply reject it as evil. 
1. The more violently it denounced the exploitation of the working class, which is inseparable from capitalism, the less able was it clearly to show in what this exploitation consists and how it arises. 
1. But for this it was necessary, on the one hand, to present the capitalist mode of production in its historical interconnection and its necessity for a specific historical period, and therefore also the necessity of its doom; and, on the other, to lay bare its essential character, which was still hidden. 
1. This was done by the discovery of surplus-value. 
1. It was shown that the appropriation of unpaid labour is the basic form of the capitalist mode of production and of the exploitation of the worker effected by it; that even if the capitalist buys the labour-power of his worker at the full value it possesses as a commodity on the market, he still extracts more value from it than he paid for; and that in the last analysis this surplus-value forms those sums of value from which there is heaped up the constantly increasing mass of capital in the hands of the possessing classes. 
1. The process both of capitalist production and of the production of capital was explained.  
1. These two great discoveries, the materialist conception of history and the revelation of the secret of capitalist production through surplus-value, we owe to Marx. With them *socialism became a science*, which had now to be elaborated in all its details and interconnections.



***
### Notes from before December 2023

## Part 2 p. 55-63

1. Hegel's inheritance of classical Greek dialectics: 'the old Greek philosophers were all born dialecticians and Aristotle--the most encyclopedic intellect among them--had already investigated the most essential forms of dialectical thought.' p.55
1. Brief sketch of two modes of thought: (1) metaphysical vs (2) materialist. Starts on second paragraph of p.55. Ends near middle of p.61.
1. 'In 1831, the first working-class rising took place in Lyons; between 1838 and 1842, the first national working-class movement, that of the English Chartists, reached its height. The class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie came to the front in the history of the most advanced countries in Europe in proportion to the development, on the one hand, of modern industry, and on the other, of the recently acquired political supremacy of the bourgeoisie.' p. 61
1. 'Facts more and more strenuously gave the lie to the teachings of bourgeois economics on the identity of the interests of capital and labour, on the general harmony and general prosperity flowing from free competition. None of these things could be ignored any longer, any more than the French and English socialism, which was their theoretical, though extremely imperfect, expression. But the old idealist conception of history, which was not yet dislodged, knew nothing of class struggles based on material interests, indeed knew nothing at all of material interests; production and all economic relations appeared in it only as incidental, subordinate elements in the "history of civilization." p.61 
1. 'The new facts made imperative a new examination of *all* past history. Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception of its primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these social classes warring with each other are always the products of the relations of production and exchange—in a word, of the economic relations of their epoch; that therefore the economic structure of society always forms the real basis, from which, in the last analysis, the whole superstructure of legal and political institutions as well as of the religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical period is to be explained.' p.61-62
1. **'Hegel had freed the conception of history from metaphysics—he had made it dialectical; but his conception of history was essentially idealistic.'**
1. 'But now idealism was driven from its last refuge, the conception of history; now a materialistic treatment of history was advanced, and the way found to explain man’s consciousness by his being, instead of, as heretofore, his being by his consciousness.' 
1. 'Henceforward socialism no longer appeared as an accidental discovery by this or that intellect of genius, but as the necessary outcome of the struggle between two classes produced by history--the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.'
1. 'Its task was no longer to manufacture as perfect a system of society as possible, but to examine the historico-economic process from which these classes and their antagonism had of necessity sprung and to discover in the economic situation thus created the means of ending the conflict.'
1. 'But the earlier socialism was just as incompatible with this materialist conception of history as the French materialists’ conception of nature was with dialectics and modern natural science.'
1. 'The earlier socialism certainly criticized the existing capitalist mode of production and its consequences. But it could not explain this mode of production, and, therefore, could not get the mastery of it. It could only simply reject it as evil. The more violently it denounced the exploitation of the working class, which is inseparable from capitalism, the less able was it clearly to show in what this exploitation consists and how it arises. But for this it was necessary, on the one hand, to present the capitalist mode of production in its historical interconnection and its necessity for a specific historical period, and therefore also the necessity of its doom; and, on the other, to lay bare its essential character, which was still hidden.' p.62 
1. **'This was done by the discovery of surplus value.'**
1. 'It was shown that the appropriation of unpaid labor is the basic form of the capitalist mode of production and of the exploitation of the worker effected by it; that even if the capitalist buys the labour-power of his worker at the full value it possesses as a commodity on the market, he still extracts more value from it than he paid for; and that in the last analysis this surplus-value forms those sums of value from which there is heaped up the constantly increasing mass of capital in the hands of the possessing classes. The process both of capitalist production and of the production of capital was explained.' p. 62-63
1. 'These two great discoveries, the materialist conception of history and the revelation of the secret of capitalist production through surplus-value, we owe to Marx. With them socialism became a science, which had now to be elaborated in all its details and interconnections.' p.63

